Why did humans evolve in Africa? Why
this continent and not Europe, Asia, or
the Americas? Think of the Earth like a
giant laboratory. Each continent is a
workstation running its own experiment.
Some are hot and humid, others are cold
and dry. Some are violent and hostile,
while others are more tranquil and
accommodating. Every aspect of every
environment is like a different
ingredient in the stew of life. And it
was the African experiment that created
the human lineage. That's puzzled
anthropologists for years, but it's an
even deeper question to ask why. It's a
more complicated question, too. In this
video, I'll show you the evidence, the
fossils, stone tools, and genetics that
all point to Africa. But we'll also dig
deeper into our primate evolution and
the global shifts that set the stage for
humanity's rise. So, to understand where
we come from, we must start our journey
in the distant past.
A useful place to begin is with the
early evolution of primates. When you
think of a primate, you probably think
of something like a chimp, an orangutan,
or maybe a lemur. But there are as many
as 500 species belonging to the primate
order today, and we are one of them. The
diversity among us is astounding. Yet,
there are a few things we all mostly
have in common. We have grasping hands,
nails instead of claws, forward- facing
eyes with keen vision, teeth adapted to
generalized diets, and relatively big
brains. Anthropologists have a rough
idea as to when these traits started to
converge into an animal we can call a
primate. It probably happened during the
Paleocene to Eosene transition, sometime
between 75 and 55 million years ago.
It's a wide window because evolution
doesn't hand us neat timestamps. For
those of you familiar with paleontology,
you'll know why this was an important
period in Earth's history. It marks the
end of the non-avian dinosaurs. Around
this time, they started going extinct,
likely due to an asteroid impact, and
mammals began to replace them. The
primate story stretches so far back that
our earliest ancestors may have shared
the planet with the last dinosaurs. Meet
Purgatorius. Its fossils have been found
in Montana, dating as old as 66 million
years ago. It was a tiny tree dwelling
mammal that looked like a shrew until
you peer at its ankles. Then you realize
it's some sort of proto primate. Those
highly mobile ankles are a clue. They
represent the kind of wrist and ankle
mobility later primates use for clinging
to branches. Running alongside it in the
fossil record are the plesiaformms. They
were something like a cross between a
squirrel and a tiny monkey. Their
remains have been found around the
globe. Like Purgatorius, they appear to
have also been a transitional species
between more rodent-like animals and
primates. What tips the scale in favor
of primates is their tooth pattern,
which is similar to modern-day lemurs
and lorises. Since these little critters
didn't have forward- facing eyes, hands
adapted to grasping, or big brains. They
weren't full members of the primate club
yet. The full-time members came in
around 55 million years ago. They are
called the primates. These were true
primates, including the adapids and
omiyoids. They start to show the full
suite of primate traits with those
forward- facing eyes for depth
perception, grasping hands and feet with
nails instead of claws, more flexible
shoulder and wrist joints, and
relatively larger brains than the
earlier purgator. So, why did these
traits evolve in the first place?
Experts have proposed a few different
hypotheses. Early on, it was believed
that they were simply adapting to life
in the trees. However, critics argue
that there are plenty of other tree
dwelling species that did not evolve
into primates. Alternatively, the visual
predation hypothesis argues that
primates evolved as stealthy insect
hunters. Their excellent vision and
precise grasping helped snatch up small,
fast prey. Another idea is the angioperm
radiation hypothesis. Modern flowering
plants called angioperms began to evolve
around the same time. Fruit and flowers
created new food sources, selecting for
color vision and fine motor skills.
Picture these early primates learning to
spot something ripe and red against the
backdrop of green leaves. It wouldn't
have been easy before evolving the
visual capacity to do so. Each idea
comes with evidence. They certainly
lived in the trees. Their teeth and
behavior suggests insectbased diets, and
the timing of fruing plants lines up
almost perfectly. Importantly, these
explanations aren't mutually exclusive.
For example, trees full of fruit also
hosted swarms of insects. So, these
little guys probably had access to both.
In all likelihood, it was some
combination of all three that created
the perfect evolutionary soup. Each
pressure would nudge primate anatomy and
behavior in similar directions. What
matters for our story is this. Primates
evolved traits that opened ecological
doors. These traits set the stage for
what would eventually produce us, a
smart, adaptable species. Next is a
crucial stage in primate evolution, and
it actually didn't happen in Africa.
Around 40 million years ago, the first
higher primates show up in the fossil
record. They're called anthropoids, and
they included the ancestors of all
monkeys, apes, and humans. This is when
the primate experiment started to look
more modern. The oldest anthropoid
fossil was found in China. The
remarkably tiny specimen is called
eosyimius, which means a dawn monkey.
It's their short heel bone that tells us
they moved around the trees in a similar
way to modern monkeys. New fossil finds
from Myanmar and Pakistan affirm that
Asia was probably the starting place for
this group of primates. They eventually
made it into the African continent. And
if we didn't know more about our
planet's geological history, we might
assume they simply migrated there,
climbing from branch to branch over a
vast jungle canopy. But there's a twist.
Africa and Asia weren't always connected
by land. They were separated by the Teis
Seaway, which linked the Atlantic and
Indian oceans. This would have posed a
massive barrier for migrating
anthropoids. Shortly after 40 million
years ago, a slow motion clash of
continents reshaped with this ancient
ocean. Deep beneath our feet, Earth
behaves like a slow lava lamp. Heat from
the core warms the mantle rock, which
rises as buoyant plumes and then cools
and sinks. This creates sluggish
convection currents. These currents drag
the rigid crust we stand on, causing
largecale tectonic shifts. Sometimes a
hot mantle plume reaches upward and
balloons the crust. It was a combination
of these geological events that
connected Africa with Asia. The Afar
plume, for example, lifted plateaus in
northeast Africa. The African and
Arabian tectonic plates drifted north,
driven by the heat rising from the
Earth's mantle. They slammed into the
southern edge of Eurasia. This collision
pushed up mountains in places like
Turkey and Iran. It also welded Arabia
to Africa. More importantly, it created
new land. Volcanic material rose from
the depths, hardening into islands. By
around 20 million years ago, a land mass
called the Gumpreum land bridge formed,
closing the Tethus Seaway and connecting
the continents for good. This changed
ocean circulations in monsoon patterns,
which gradually increased aridity in
some places while enhancing rainfall
elsewhere. A variety of new ecosystems
formed in and around the landbridge from
dense forests to grassy savas. This was
the opportunity our anthropoid ancestors
needed. They first got to Africa using
those early island chains and shallowing
seas. Thank god they did because those
that remained in Asia are believed to
have gone extinct due to a severe
cooling period. Who knows if we'd be
here if it wasn't for those island
hopping primates. Once isolated in
Africa, the immigrant anthropoids
diversified. This is when we see new
world and oldw world monkeys splitting
into different lineages. Today, tiny
traits separate them, including their
nostril orientation and tooth counts.
But the bigger story is about their
geography. The population that would
become New World monkeys mysteriously
made it to South America. The current
hypothesis is that they drifted across
the Atlantic Ocean on a giant natural
raft made largely of vegetation. This is
our most reasonable explanation, but we
don't know for sure. Those that remained
in Africa would become old world monkeys
and apes. Once that landbridge formed 20
million years ago, it allowed for even
larger scale migrations. Tons of Asian
rodents, undulates, and carnivores
poured into Africa for the first time.
In the other direction, an elephant-like
genus known as Gumparreum entered Asia.
The name Gumperum landbridge comes from
these massive mammals. African primates
joined the party, too, and recolonized
Asia using the landbridge. In short,
these massive tectonic events opened
doors for otherwise isolated animals.
What was once a barrier became a gateway
for primates to cross-colonize these
continents and kickstart a new
evolutionary chapter. Asia supplied the
seeds and planted them in Africa. But a
few things still had to happen before we
see humanity sprout from the African
soil. By the measine epoch around 23
million years ago, the primate
experiment intensifies and inches
towards us. Apes burst onto the scene.
Unlike monkeys, apes, including humans,
lack tails. They also have larger
brains, more complex social lives, and
bigger bodies in general. One of the
earliest candidates was proconsul. The
proconsul group consists of as many as
15 different species living mostly in
East Africa around 20 million years ago.
They had a monkeyike body, ape-like
teeth, and a relatively larger brain.
Because of this mix, some researchers
hesitate to call them a true ape. That
said, their main ape trait was their
lack of a tail. This half monkey, half
ape design makes it a good model for a
transitional species. Note how its body
plan continues to build on adaptations
we saw in Purgatorius and the first
primates millions of years earlier. Two
important climate events took place as
our ape lineage was taking shape. First
was a climate optimum around 17 million
years ago. Subtropical forests spread
across Eurasia and Africa as
temperatures significantly increased.
Various apes used these forests to
expand further into Europe and Asia. And
the fossil map fills with odd relatives.
We see swamp apes in Spain, forest apes
in Hungary, island specialists off
Italy, and Asian forms foreshadowing
orangutans. But this roaring ape
expansion came to an end a few million
years later as temperatures began to
plummet. A brutal cooling period at the
end of the Mayene wiped out most
Eurasian apes. The poor Dryopcthecus was
one of these. Dryopitheycus thrived in
Europe between roughly 12 and 9 million
years ago. Fossils show it was about
chimpsized with long arms, flexible
joints, and curved fingers built for
swinging and climbing. Its brain was
comparable to a chimps as well. Its
teeth were very ape-like with sharp
canines and cheek teeth adapted to
chewing fruit. Close examinations of
their tooth enamel suggest they grew
slowly, which is an important trait in
the ape lineage. Just think about how
long it takes a human to mature compared
to other animals. This is essential for
the growth of our big brains and
intelligence. Dryopithecus was
officially an ape. Despite its novel
adaptations, it could not withstand the
drastic climate changes of its time.
This cooling period dried up the lush
European forests. Their habitats
gradually shrunk and they eventually
went extinct. A host of other European
apes followed suit. As a result, really
only Africa and parts of Southeast Asia
remained as refues. The surviving
primates in Africa included lineages
that would give rise to chimps,
gorillas, and eventually hominins. Those
evolving into orangutans and gibbons
were the Asian offshoots. After the
meiosene boom and Eurasian collapse, the
primate story continues to puzzle us. By
7 million years ago, the human lineage
began to emerge. But the gaps at this
critical point are extra frustrating. We
don't have a ton of fossils from this
period, so making connections between
species is very difficult. Hence why we
don't necessarily have a quote unquote
missing link. Nonetheless, the fossils
we do have tell us one thing. Africa was
our Garden of Eden. The Dawn of Humanity
looks more like a garage band than a
polished symphony. It's messy, bold, and
experimental. Like I said, it started
around 7 million years ago when we
separated from our common ancestor with
chimpanzees. While the chimps still
favored the trees and only knuckle
walked while on the ground, our lineage
began to favor the ground. We became
bipeedal, meaning we walk on two feet.
Other apes only do this on occasion, but
we're fully committed. This is what
really sets us apart from the rest of
the primates. It's what makes us
special, and the first fossils with
signs of this trait come from Africa.
This is honestly one of our biggest
clues supporting an African origin for
humanity. Just a heads up, there are
quite a few hominin species that could
be discussed here. So, for the sake of
time, we'll have to pick and choose a
few highlights. The earliest example is
a species called Salanthropus Chidensis.
It shows up in Chad at just about that 7
million-year mark. It would have looked
very similar to a chimp, but this
fossilized skull tells us it wasn't. The
hole at the base of the skull is called
the fammen magnum. It connects the brain
stem to the spinal cord. Insanthropus,
it sits close to the front. This is
unlike other apes whose framan magnum is
further back. It suggests that this
species could stand or walk with a more
vertical posture. Since its fossils are
pretty scarce, whether it was fully
upright is still debated. A million
years later, Auroran tuganensis appears
in Kenya. Its femur tells an even
clearer story. The femoral head, which
would have fit into its pelvis, looks
almost like that of a human. When you
stand upright, your legs bear more
weight and bear it differently. And this
femur is better attuned to that
function. But like silanthropus, Auroran
is known from only a handful of fossils.
So its place on the family tree is
fuzzy. Then comes Artipythecus, also
known as Arty. Arty was found in
Ethiopia and is four 5 million years
old. The skull and pelvis hint at
habitual bipedalism. Some key signs are
its forward frame and magnum, B-shaped
pelvis, and knees that slightly bow
inward. Again, these mostly help
stabilize the weight of the upper body.
Yet, the foot keeps a fiercely divergent
big toe for gripping branches. Think of
Arty as a multi-use vehicle built to
drive on the ground, but still excellent
for off-roading in the trees. Arty was
followed by a large genus of hominins
known as Oralopycus. With so many
different species, we can't cover them
all. They spanned from roughly 4 million
to 1 million years ago, living in East
and South Africa. They all share signs
of habitual bipedality with many of the
same traits as Arty. Take Oralopythecus
apherenis for example. You may know her
as Lucy. In addition to her knees and
hips, she had a spine that was more
adept at supporting an upright posture.
Oralopythecus even left us footprints to
reassure ourselves of their relatively
modern locomotion. They're 3.6 million
years old and come from a site called
Leatoi in Tanzania. The footprints have
stayed preserved in volcanic ash. The
impressions indicate these hominins
walked heel first, transferred their
weight to the ball of their foot, then
pushed off their toes. The tracks also
hint at family life, showing possible
evidence of youngsters following their
parents' footsteps. So, it's pretty
locked in. Oralopythecus was literally
making strides toward modern humans.
Inevitably, the next question is why did
these species start walking on two feet?
For starters, their bodies were kind of
pre-addapted to it in a sense. A body
built for climbing trees is actually
better suited to transitioning to
bipedalism than walking on all fours. It
sounds like a contradiction, but
navigating trees requires a degree of
familiarity with being oriented
vertically. Compare this to something
like a fox whose body is almost always
oriented horizontally. But as the saying
goes, don't fix what ain't broke. If
everything was going fine up in the
trees, these ancient hominins might have
never evolved. There had to have been
some evolutionary incentive to ditch
whatever wasn't working. Numerous
hypotheses have been proposed to explain
this phenomenon. However, the most
compelling idea we have at the moment is
this. There was no single cause. It was
a stack of pressures that pushed some
apes upright and once it worked, it
stuck. In other words, multiple
hypotheses fit together. The initial
drivers were most likely environmental
shifts occurring in Africa. Paleo
environmental work has shown that during
the time of aopythecus and the early
hominins, their environments were
shifting from dense jungles to patchy
woodlands. After exhausting a patch of
food, these hominins would then need to
travel some distance to find another. to
do so. Bipedalism is more efficient than
walking on all fours. Bipeedal walking
uses less energy across long distances
and helps with thermmorreulation. This
goes handinhand with the postural
feeding idea which says apes stood up to
reach and grab food. Think about it.
Before moving on to the next patch, it
would have been helpful to maximize your
caloric input here first. So reaching
for those tough to get fruits before
your travels would have favored an
upright stance. This could be a reason
why many of these hominins still retain
some of their climbing traits to grab
those higher foods. We even see some
modern apes doing this while feeding.
Lastly, the provisioning hypothesis,
which adds the human-like social
pressures, carrying food, infants, or
tools would have been more efficient
once our hands were freed. All of these
factors would have worked in conjunction
to help hominins adapt to the more
patchy forests of Africa. It was this
continent that offered the right stage
for these pressures to play out
repeatedly. Contrast this to orangutans.
Orangutans are a longunning success
story of tree life. Their lineage split
from African apes back in the measine.
They migrated to Southeast Asia's
rainforest and remained there for
millions of years. They evolved into
big, slowmoving apes with very long
arms, hook-like hands, and feet built
for gripping branches. Orangutan anatomy
still favors living in the canopy. Their
rainforest conditions have stayed
relatively stable, so there was a little
selective pressure to adopt a new life
on the ground. No significant pressures,
no new species. Unlike orangutan stable
aroreal story, early hominins were set
on a very different evolutionary path.
These species represent the first
bipeedal walkers in the hominan lineage
and the fossil evidence confirms they
arose in Africa. They are a great proxy
to investigate where we come from. But
we don't have any sufficient evidence
that any of them were our direct
ancestors. So when looking at our own
evolution, we must be more specific. Our
genus, the homo genus, first appeared in
Africa, too. Homohabilis is the oldest
relative in this genus. It lived mainly
in East Africa and its fossils are dated
to shortly after 3 million years ago.
Accompanying this species are some of
the earliest known tools known as old
choppers. They're pretty big and clunky,
but they would have been a gamecher for
scavenging meat and accessing bone
marrow. Earlier tools known as lomequi
choppers were found in Kenya and date to
about 3.3 million years ago. But the
species of human that made them remains
ambiguous. What matters is that newly
freed hands shaped by millions of years
of climbing dexterity were now turning
stone into tools. Following habilis was
Homo erectus. This is where things get a
little trickier. Homo erectus is the
first homminid that would almost feel
human if you saw them today. They were
permanently bipedal. They had longer
legs than arms and their brains were
significantly larger than all prior
species. A seriously important feature
of erectus is that it's the oldest human
species we have evidence of outside of
Africa. It's believed that a combination
of their more advanced aulian tools and
hunting strategies gave them the
advantage to partake in such vast
migrations. By about 1.8 million years
ago, erectus made it to the demoni site
in Georgia, demonstrating they were
already living in western Eurasia. From
roughly the same time, populations show
up in Indonesia. They even persist on
the island of Java for well over a
million years. This wide reach creates
two headaches. First is the possibility
that regional populations evolved
locally. African, Georgian, and Javanese
fossils display differences in skull
shape, brain size, and body size. Some
researchers classify African forms into
Homoaster and keep Asian fossils as
homoerectus. Others lump them together
as a single highly variable species.
Second, early dispersals and long
survival on different continents mean
the fossil record is painted by a broad
brush. It's hard to draw clean lines
between species origins and migrations.
However, the oldest Homoctus fossils
still come from Africa, specifically
around Lake Turkana in Kenya. They date
to between 1.8 and 2 million years ago.
This strongly suggests that the species
first emerged in Africa before spreading
outward. Once on the move, they adapted
to a wide range of environments quickly.
They survived the savas of Africa, the
temperate valleys of the caucus, and the
tropical forests of Southeast Asia. This
flexibility is part of what makes
Homoctus so important. So, in short, it
probably evolved in Africa and migrated
outward early, but its huge range and
local variation muddy any simplified
stories about where we come from or who
we are. So based on the current state of
the archaeological record, hominins and
our homo genus most likely came from
Africa. Time to narrow in on our species
specifically, Homo sapiens. Here things
get even wonkier. The oldest Homo
sapiens fossil consists of skull
fragments discovered in Morocco, dating
to 300,000 years ago. This is yet
another point on the scoreboard for
Africa. What complicates things is that
we weren't the only species of Homo
around at this time. There were so many
human variants that started emerging
around 1 million years ago and after.
These include homo anticcessor, homohyal
bberensis and the famous neanderthalss.
And they've been found all over the old
world. So where do we fit in this mix?
Two competing hypotheses have
historically duped it out. The out of
Africa hypothesis versus multi-reional
evolution. The out of Africa hypothesis
argues that homo sapiens evolved once in
Africa and later spread across the world
largely replacing other archaic humans.
The multi-reional hypothesis argues that
modern humans evolved in various
locations simultaneously from earlier
homoerectus populations and they had
constant gene flow keeping them one
species. But in recent years, DNA and
genetics have helped sharpen the
picture. For example, the greatest
genetic diversity among modern humans is
in Africa. Genetic diversity builds up
over long periods of time as things like
mutations accumulate. So, the fact that
Africans have more variation than
anywhere else means that homo sapiens
have been living and evolving there the
longest. Populations outside of Africa
carry only a subset of that variation,
which makes sense. if small groups
migrated out of Africa later and took
only part of that gene pool with them.
This is supported by additional genetic
evidence indicating that all non-African
people today can trace their genes to
small populations that left the
continent around 50,000 years ago.
Shortly thereafter, all other species of
homo were extinct. Our deeper genetic
diversity in Africa points to the out of
Africa hypothesis. However, ancient
interbreeding with species like
Neanderthalss and Denisovans left traces
in the DNA of non-Africans. So, it
wasn't a pure replacement. There was
some multi-reional mixing between
species, but Homo sapiens came to
dominate. What was it about early Homo
sapiens in Africa that gave them such an
advantage? Why wasn't it the other way
around with species like Neanderthalss
migrating into Africa and replacing Homo
sapiens? The answer lies in a
combination of our genetics, our
sociality, and the ancient African
environments that shape them. New
research paints a continentwide social
web of ancient Homo sapiens. A
pan-African network of people, genes,
and ideas stretches back hundreds of
thousands of years. We see this
archaeologically by the presence of
artifacts that were traded or migrated
with humans over long distances. For
example, ostrich eggshell beads moved
across the continent 50,000 years ago.
200,000 years ago, obsidian for tool
making traveled over 160 km, and
pigments were traded as far back as
320,000 years ago. Even gift exchange
systems among modern Africans echo the
same logic today. Among today's San
hunter gather communities,
anthropologists have observed a
continuing practice of reciprocal
giftgiving known as Zaro. I think I'm
pronouncing that right, which functions
as a long-distance social network. It's
wild to think that such a practice could
be hundreds of thousands of years old.
Furthermore, genetic and archaeological
data show repeated cycles of isolation
and contact. Groups often diverged and
inhabited local places for long
stretches. This would produce cultural
and slight anatomical differences unique
to their respective environments. Then
intermittent contact between groups let
those separate innovations recombine.
Think of what breeds innovation
nowadays. Music is a good example.
Regional music can be seen as
semiisolated populations. Blues grew out
of African traditions and work songs.
Country sprung from rural folk and
ballads. Gospel and R&B grew from church
and urban life. When these genres met at
record shops, radio stations, and
dances, they mixed. Artists borrowed
riffs and other ideas and invented
something new, rock and roll. This is
the same mechanism that occurred in
ancient Africa for thousands of years.
Studies looking at huntergatherer
networks confirm that parallel invention
in semiisolated groups followed by
recombination speeds up the rise of
complex technologies better than a
single fully connected population could.
The same is almost certainly true for
genetics. Genetic diversity is a
safeguard against extinction. A wider
gene pool means more opportunity for
positive mutations. This pan-African
network would have promoted such
variation while keeping Homo sapiens
integrated as a species. The result is
mosaic evolution. Modern human biology
and culture emerged from many
interacting populations, not one single
tribe. We owe our adaptability to that
variation. And it's that adaptability
that allowed us to outpace other human
species. So our story is long, but the
preponderance of evidence supports an
African origin of humanity. The fossils,
stone tools, and genetics all converge
on this continent, and the reasons for
this are many. It started with the
earliest primates adapting to a complex
prehistoric world with new adaptations.
Then massive tectonic events allowed
their descendants to eventually migrate
into Africa, keeping them safe from the
Eurasian extinctions. The dramatic
climate shifts of the African continent
provided the right pressures for
ancestral apes to start walking on the
ground. Its wide range of environments
then prompted homo sapiens to develop
immense variation and become the most
adaptable species on the planet. But
science is built on challenging the
status quo. We must keep our minds open
and never settle for the current
paradigm. Paradigms are always shifting
and with each turn we get a little
closer to the truth. So what if we
didn't evolve in Africa? What are the
best arguments against an African
origin? First was one mascine ape living
in Europe that makes us reconsider some
things. The headline making ape is
called Denuvius. It lived in Germany
around 11 million years ago. Its
skeletal remains gave researchers a rare
detailed glimpse of how some ancient
apes moved about. It had long forlims
and hind limbs, mobile wrists and
ankles, and joint shapes suggesting the
animal could both climb and adopt an
upright posture on its hind legs.
Researchers have called this form of
locomotion extended limb clamoring. They
say that Denuvius combines the
adaptations of bipeds and suspensory
apes and provides a model for the common
ancestor of great apes and humans. Why
does that matter? Because it pushes back
the possible origins of upright body
mechanics well before the African
hominin story. While it wasn't totally
bipeedal, its posture makes it a
provocative candidate for the ancestor
to the homminin lineage. An alternative
idea could be that Denuvius's
descendants gave rise to hominins in
Europe who then migrated to Africa. That
said, there's a long geographic and
temporal gap before the first hominins
appear. More fossils within that gap
would be needed to support this. Another
challenge deals with Homo erectus
specifically. We touched on it before,
but it's plausible that Homoctus gave
rise to Homo sapiens somewhere
throughout the Eurasian land mass.
Having lived there for over a million
years, there was plenty of time for
evolutionary changes to build on this
already adaptable species. Also, we can
extend our logic for the rise of homo
sapiens in Africa to this species. If
inhabiting a wide environmental range
helped African homo sapiens diversify
and innovate, why would it not do the
same for Eurasian homoerectus? It's not
impossible that this happened first,
then those Eurasian populations migrated
back into Africa and were evolutionarily
refined into homo sapiens. Even early
scientists such as Ernst Heckle
speculated this when observing the Java
man fossils. They believe that this
Indonesian homoerectus represented an
intermediate form between orangutans or
gibbons and humans. Genetics tells us we
are more closely related to African
chimps than these Asian primates. So
that's off the table. This doesn't
disprove that later homo erectus living
in Asia could have contributed to our
lineage more than we know. Lastly, the
homo sapiens fossils we find outside of
Africa keep getting older. Two sites are
especially important. Misleia cave in
Israel and Apademma cave in Greece. In
Misla Cave, a single jawbone was found
intact in a middle paleolithic layer. It
matches modern human anatomy with its
U-shaped dental arcade and cheekbone
placement near the first mer. It also
sat beside a full Lava toolkit
resembling African technology of the
time. Multiple dating methods placed
this fossil between 194,000 and 177,000
years ago. Two skull fragments were
found in Epidemma cave. Digital
reconstruction showed that one has a
rounded modern human rear skull and
dates to 210,000 years ago. This makes
it the oldest known Homo sapiens fossil
outside of Africa. Interestingly, the
other skull is that of a Neanderthal and
dates to around 170,000 years ago. The
pair of skulls tells a story of early
Homo sapiens reaching this part of the
world before Neanderthalss. Neither site
is as old as the fossil from Morocco,
but they give us a reason to continue
our search for early Homo sapiens
outside of Africa. But now I want to
know what you think. I have two
questions for you. First, what do you
think of the evidence? Are you on team
Africa or team Eurasia? Second, I want
you to speculate what humanity would
look like today if homo sapiens evolved
elsewhere. How different would modern
civilization look had we began somewhere
like Australia? Or if the new world
monkeys of South America evolved into
humans? Let me know what you think in
the comments. Since you made it to the
end, you must be a lover of history and
prehistory like myself. So, I have two
more things you'll probably like. Check
out my free newsletter in the video
description. Subscribe with your email
and you'll get updates on the channel,
archaeology related news, and even music
suggestions. And if you still want more,
watch this video about ancient North
America. Thanks for watching, and I'll
see you in the next one.